                                                                         CHAPTER 1
                                                                  Introduction




The job “software architect” appears near the top of numerous lists of best jobs across
the world. Yet when readers look at the other jobs on those lists (like nurse practi‐
tioner or finance manager), there’s a clear career path for them. Why is there no path
for software architects?
First, the industry doesn’t have a good definition of software architecture itself. When
we teach foundational classes, students often ask for a concise definition of what a
software architect does, and we have adamantly refused to give one. And we’re not
the only ones. In his famous whitepaper “Who Needs an Architect?” Martin Fowler
famously refused to try to define it, instead falling back on the famous quote:
    Architecture is about the important stuff…whatever that is.
       —Ralph Johnson

When pressed, we created the mindmap shown in Figure 1-1, which is woefully
incomplete but indicative of the scope of software architecture. We will, in fact, offer
our definition of software architecture shortly.
Second, as illustrated in the mindmap, the role of software architect embodies a mas‐
sive amount and scope of responsibility that continues to expand. A decade ago, soft‐
ware architects dealt only with the purely technical aspects of architecture, like
modularity, components, and patterns. Since then, because of new architectural styles
that leverage a wider swath of capabilities (like microservices), the role of software
architect has expanded. We cover the many intersections of architecture and the
remainder of the organization in “Intersection of Architecture and…” on page 13.




                                                                                       1
Figure 1-1. The responsibilities of a software architect encompass technical abilities, soft
skills, operational awareness, and a host of others

Third, software architecture is a constantly moving target because of the rapidly
evolving software development ecosystem. Any definition cast today will be hope‐
lessly outdated in a few years. The Wikipedia definition of software architecture pro‐
vides a reasonable overview, but many statements are outdated, such as “Software
architecture is about making fundamental structural choices which are costly to
change once implemented.” Yet architects designed modern architectural styles like
microservices with the idea of incremental built in—it is no longer expensive to make
structural changes in microservices. Of course, that capability means trade-offs with
other concerns, such as coupling. Many books on software architecture treat it as a
static problem; once solved, we can safely ignore it. However, we recognize the inher‐
ent dynamic nature of software architecture, including the definition itself, through‐
out the book.
Fourth, much of the material about software architecture has only historical rele‐
vance. Readers of the Wikipedia page won’t fail to notice the bewildering array of
acronyms and cross-references to an entire universe of knowledge. Yet, many of these
acronyms represent outdated or failed attempts. Even solutions that were perfectly
valid a few years ago cannot work now because the context has changed. The history
of software architecture is littered with things architects have tried, only to realize the
damaging side effects. We cover many of those lessons in this book.


2   | Chapter 1: Introduction
Why a book on software architecture fundamentals now? The scope of software
architecture isn’t the only part of the development world that constantly changes.
New technologies, techniques, capabilities…in fact, it’s easier to find things that
haven’t changed over the last decade than to list all the changes. Software architects
must make decisions within this constantly changing ecosystem. Because everything
changes, including foundations upon which we make decisions, architects should
reexamine some core axioms that informed earlier writing about software architec‐
ture. For example, earlier books about software architecture don’t consider the impact
of DevOps because it didn’t exist when these books were written.
When studying architecture, readers must keep in mind that, like much art, it can
only be understood in context. Many of the decisions architects made were based on
realities of the environment they found themselves in. For example, one of the major
goals of late 20th-century architecture included making the most efficient use of
shared resources, because all the infrastructure at the time was expensive and com‐
mercial: operating systems, application servers, database servers, and so on. Imagine
strolling into a 2002 data center and telling the head of operations “Hey, I have a great
idea for a revolutionary style of architecture, where each service runs on its own iso‐
lated machinery, with its own dedicated database (describing what we now know as
microservices). So, that means I’ll need 50 licenses for Windows, another 30 applica‐
tion server licenses, and at least 50 database server licenses.” In 2002, trying to build
an architecture like microservices would be inconceivably expensive. Yet, with the
advent of open source during the intervening years, coupled with updated engineer‐
ing practices via the DevOps revolution, we can reasonably build an architecture as
described. Readers should keep in mind that all architectures are a product of their
context.

Defining Software Architecture
The industry as a whole has struggled to precisely define “software architecture.”
Some architects refer to software architecture as the blueprint of the system, while
others define it as the roadmap for developing a system. The issue with these com‐
mon definitions is understanding what the blueprint or roadmap actually contains.
For example, what is analyzed when an architect analyzes an architecture?




                                                            Defining Software Architecture   |   3
Figure 1-2 illustrates a way to think about software architecture. In this definition,
software architecture consists of the structure of the system (denoted as the heavy
black lines supporting the architecture), combined with architecture characteristics
(“-ilities”) the system must support, architecture decisions, and finally design princi‐
ples.




Figure 1-2. Architecture consists of the structure combined with architecture characteris‐
tics (“-ilities”), architecture decisions, and design principles




4   |   Chapter 1: Introduction
The structure of the system, as illustrated in Figure 1-3, refers to the type of architec‐
ture style (or styles) the system is implemented in (such as microservices, layered, or
microkernel). Describing an architecture solely by the structure does not wholly elu‐
cidate an architecture. For example, suppose an architect is asked to describe an
architecture, and that architect responds “it’s a microservices architecture.” Here, the
architect is only talking about the structure of the system, but not the architecture of
the system. Knowledge of the architecture characteristics, architecture decisions, and
design principles is also needed to fully understand the architecture of the system.




Figure 1-3. Structure refers to the type of architecture styles used in the system




                                                               Defining Software Architecture   |   5
Architecture characteristics are another dimension of defining software architecture
(see Figure 1-4). The architecture characteristics define the success criteria of a sys‐
tem, which is generally orthogonal to the functionality of the system. Notice that all
of the characteristics listed do not require knowledge of the functionality of the sys‐
tem, yet they are required in order for the system to function properly. Architecture
characteristics are so important that we’ve devoted several chapters in this book to
understanding and defining them.




Figure 1-4. Architecture characteristics refers to the “-ilities” that the system must
support

The next factor that defines software architecture is architecture decisions. Architec‐
ture decisions define the rules for how a system should be constructed. For example,
an architect might make an architecture decision that only the business and services
layers within a layered architecture can access the database (see Figure 1-5), restrict‐
ing the presentation layer from making direct database calls. Architecture decisions
form the constraints of the system and direct the development teams on what is and
what isn’t allowed.




6   |   Chapter 1: Introduction
Figure 1-5. Architecture decisions are rules for constructing systems

If a particular architecture decision cannot be implemented in one part of the system
due to some condition or other constraint, that decision (or rule) can be broken
through something called a variance. Most organizations have variance models that
are used by an architecture review board (ARB) or chief architect. Those models for‐
malize the process for seeking a variance to a particular standard or architecture deci‐
sion. An exception to a particular architecture decision is analyzed by the ARB (or
chief architect if no ARB exists) and is either approved or denied based on justifica‐
tions and trade-offs.
The last factor in the definition of architecture is design principles. A design principle
differs from an architecture decision in that a design principle is a guideline rather
than a hard-and-fast rule. For example, the design principle illustrated in Figure 1-6
states that the development teams should leverage asynchronous messaging between
services within a microservices architecture to increase performance. An architecture
decision (rule) could never cover every condition and option for communication
between services, so a design principle can be used to provide guidance for the pre‐
ferred method (in this case, asynchronous messaging) to allow the developer to
choose a more appropriate communication protocol (such as REST or gRPC) given a
specific circumstance.




                                                             Defining Software Architecture   |   7
Figure 1-6. Design principles are guidelines for constructing systems

Expectations of an Architect
Defining the role of a software architect presents as much difficulty as defining soft‐
ware architecture. It can range from expert programmer up to defining the strategic
technical direction for the company. Rather than waste time on the fool’s errand of
defining the role, we recommend focusing on the expectations of an architect.
There are eight core expectations placed on a software architect, irrespective of any
given role, title, or job description:

    • Make architecture decisions
    • Continually analyze the architecture
    • Keep current with latest trends
    • Ensure compliance with decisions
    • Diverse exposure and experience
    • Have business domain knowledge
    • Possess interpersonal skills
    • Understand and navigate politics



8   |   Chapter 1: Introduction
The first key to effectiveness and success in the software architect role depends on
understanding and practicing each of these expectations.

Make Architecture Decisions
An architect is expected to define the architecture decisions and design principles used to
guide technology decisions within the team, the department, or across the enterprise.
Guide is the key operative word in this first expectation. An architect should guide
rather than specify technology choices. For example, an architect might make a deci‐
sion to use React.js for frontend development. In this case, the architect is making a
technical decision rather than an architectural decision or design principle that will
help the development team make choices. An architect should instead instruct devel‐
opment teams to use a reactive-based framework for frontend web development, hence
guiding the development team in making the choice between Angular, Elm, React.js,
Vue, or any of the other reactive-based web frameworks.
Guiding technology choices through architecture decisions and design principles is
difficult. The key to making effective architectural decisions is asking whether the
architecture decision is helping to guide teams in making the right technical choice or
whether the architecture decision makes the technical choice for them. That said, an
architect on occasion might need to make specific technology decisions in order to
preserve a particular architectural characteristic such as scalability, performance, or
availability. In this case it would be still considered an architectural decision, even
though it specifies a particular technology. Architects often struggle with finding the
correct line, so Chapter 19 is entirely about architecture decisions.

Continually Analyze the Architecture
An architect is expected to continually analyze the architecture and current technology
environment and then recommend solutions for improvement.
This expectation of an architect refers to architecture vitality, which assesses how via‐
ble the architecture that was defined three or more years ago is today, given changes
in both business and technology. In our experience, not enough architects focus their
energies on continually analyzing existing architectures. As a result, most architec‐
tures experience elements of structural decay, which occurs when developers make
coding or design changes that impact the required architectural characteristics, such
as performance, availability, and scalability.
Other forgotten aspects of this expectation that architects frequently forget are testing
and release environments. Agility for code modification has obvious benefits, but if it
takes teams weeks to test changes and months for releases, then architects cannot
achieve agility in the overall architecture.



                                                                Expectations of an Architect   |   9
An architect must holistically analyze changes in technology and problem domains to
determine the soundness of the architecture. While this kind of consideration rarely
appears in a job posting, architects must meet this expectation to keep applications
relevant.

Keep Current with Latest Trends
An architect is expected to keep current with the latest technology and industry trends.
Developers must keep up to date on the latest technologies they use on a daily basis to
remain relevant (and to retain a job!). An architect has an even more critical require‐
ment to keep current on the latest technical and industry trends. The decisions an
architect makes tend to be long-lasting and difficult to change. Understanding and
following key trends helps the architect prepare for the future and make the correct
decision.
Tracking trends and keeping current with those trends is hard, particularly for a soft‐
ware architect. In Chapter 24 we discuss various techniques and resources on how to
do this.

Ensure Compliance with Decisions
An architect is expected to ensure compliance with architecture decisions and design
principles.
Ensuring compliance means that the architect is continually verifying that develop‐
ment teams are following the architecture decisions and design principles defined,
documented, and communicated by the architect. Consider the scenario where an
architect makes a decision to restrict access to the database in a layered architecture
to only the business and services layers (and not the presentation layer). This means
that the presentation layer must go through all layers of the architecture to make even
the simplest of database calls. A user interface developer might disagree with this
decision and access the database (or the persistence layer) directly for performance
reasons. However, the architect made that architecture decision for a specific reason:
to control change. By closing the layers, database changes can be made without
impacting the presentation layer. By not ensuring compliance with architecture deci‐
sions, violations like this can occur, the architecture will not meet the required archi‐
tectural characteristics (“-ilities”), and the application or system will not work as
expected.
In Chapter 6 we talk more about measuring compliance using automated fitness
functions and automated tools.




10   | Chapter 1: Introduction
Diverse Exposure and Experience
An architect is expected to have exposure to multiple and diverse technologies, frame‐
works, platforms, and environments.
This expectation does not mean an architect must be an expert in every framework,
platform, and language, but rather that an architect must at least be familiar with a
variety of technologies. Most environments these days are heterogeneous, and at a
minimum an architect should know how to interface with multiple systems and serv‐
ices, irrespective of the language, platform, and technology those systems or services
are written in.
One of the best ways of mastering this expectation is for the architect to stretch their
comfort zone. Focusing only on a single technology or platform is a safe haven. An
effective software architect should be aggressive in seeking out opportunities to gain
experience in multiple languages, platforms, and technologies. A good way of master‐
ing this expectation is to focus on technical breadth rather than technical depth.
Technical breadth includes the stuff you know about, but not at a detailed level, com‐
bined with the stuff you know a lot about. For example, it is far more valuable for an
architect to be familiar with 10 different caching products and the associated pros
and cons of each rather than to be an expert in only one of them.

Have Business Domain Knowledge
An architect is expected to have a certain level of business domain expertise.
Effective software architects understand not only technology but also the business
domain of a problem space. Without business domain knowledge, it is difficult to
understand the business problem, goals, and requirements, making it difficult to
design an effective architecture to meet the requirements of the business. Imagine
being an architect at a large financial institution and not understanding common
financial terms such as an average directional index, aleatory contracts, rates rally, or
even nonpriority debt. Without this knowledge, an architect cannot communicate
with stakeholders and business users and will quickly lose credibility.
The most successful architects we know are those who have broad, hands-on techni‐
cal knowledge coupled with a strong knowledge of a particular domain. These soft‐
ware architects are able to effectively communicate with C-level executives and
business users using the domain knowledge and language that these stakeholders
know and understand. This in turn creates a strong level of confidence that the soft‐
ware architect knows what they are doing and is competent to create an effective and
correct architecture.




                                                               Expectations of an Architect   |   11
Possess Interpersonal Skills
An architect is expected to possess exceptional interpersonal skills, including teamwork,
facilitation, and leadership.
Having exceptional leadership and interpersonal skills is a difficult expectation for
most developers and architects. As technologists, developers and architects like to
solve technical problems, not people problems. However, as Gerald Weinberg was
famous for saying, “no matter what they tell you, it’s always a people problem.” An
architect is not only expected to provide technical guidance to the team, but is also
expected to lead the development teams through the implementation of the architec‐
ture. Leadership skills are at least half of what it takes to become an effective software
architect, regardless of the role or title the architect has.
The industry is flooded with software architects, all competing for a limited number
of architecture positions. Having strong leadership and interpersonal skills is a good
way for an architect to differentiate themselves from other architects and stand out
from the crowd. We’ve known many software architects who are excellent technolo‐
gists but are ineffective architects due to the inability to lead teams, coach and mentor
developers, and effectively communicate ideas and architecture decisions and princi‐
ples. Needless to say, those architects have difficulties holding a position or job.

Understand and Navigate Politics
An architect is expected to understand the political climate of the enterprise and be able
to navigate the politics.
It might seem rather strange talk about negotiation and navigating office politics in a
book about software architecture. To illustrate how important and necessary negotia‐
tion skills are, consider the scenario where a developer makes the decision to leverage
the strategy pattern to reduce the overall cyclomatic complexity of a particular piece
of complex code. Who really cares? One might applaud the developer for using such a
pattern, but in almost all cases the developer does not need to seek approval for such
a decision.
Now consider the scenario where an architect, responsible for a large customer rela‐
tionship management system, is having issues controlling database access from other
systems, securing certain customer data, and making any database schema change
because too many other systems are using the CRM database. The architect therefore
makes the decision to create what are called application silos, where each application
database is only accessible from the application owning that database. Making this
decision will give the architect better control over the customer data, security, and
change control. However, unlike the previous developer scenario, this decision will
also be challenged by almost everyone in the company (with the possible exception of
the CRM application team, of course). Other applications need the customer manage‐


12   |   Chapter 1: Introduction
ment data. If those applications are no longer able to access the database directly, they
must now ask the CRM system for the data, requiring remote access calls through
REST, SOAP, or some other remote access protocol.
The main point is that almost every decision an architect makes will be challenged.
Architectural decisions will be challenged by product owners, project managers, and
business stakeholders due to increased costs or increased effort (time) involved.
Architectural decisions will also be challenged by developers who feel their approach
is better. In either case, the architect must navigate the politics of the company and
apply basic negotiation skills to get most decisions approved. This fact can be very
frustrating to a software architect, because most decisions made as a developer did
not require approval or even a review. Programming aspects such as code structure,
class design, design pattern selection, and sometimes even language choice are all
part of the art of programming. However, an architect, now able to finally be able to
make broad and important decisions, must justify and fight for almost every one of
those decisions. Negotiation skills, like leadership skills, are so critical and necessary
that we’ve dedicated an entire chapter in the book to understanding them (see
Chapter 23).

Intersection of Architecture and…
The scope of software architecture has grown over the last decade to encompass more
and more responsibility and perspective. A decade ago, the typical relationship
between architecture and operations was contractual and formal, with lots of
bureaucracy. Most companies, trying to avoid the complexity of hosting their own
operations, frequently outsourced operations to a third-party company, with contrac‐
tual obligations for service-level agreements, such as uptime, scale, responsiveness,
and a host of other important architectural characteristics. Now, architectures such as
microservices freely leverage former solely operational concerns. For example, elastic
scale was once painfully built into architectures (see Chapter 15), while microservices
handled it less painfully via a liaison between architects and DevOps.


               History: Pets.com and Why We Have Elastic Scale
  The history of software development contains rich lessons, both good and bad. We
  assume that current capabilities (like elastic scale) just appeared one day because of
  some clever developer, but those ideas were often born of hard lessons. Pets.com rep‐
  resents an early example of hard lessons learned. Pets.com appeared in the early days
  of the internet, hoping to become the Amazon.com of pet supplies. Fortunately, they
  had a brilliant marketing department, which invented a compelling mascot: a sock
  puppet with a microphone that said irreverent things. The mascot became a superstar,
  appearing in public at parades and national sporting events.



                                                         Intersection of Architecture and…   |   13
     Unfortunately, management at Pets.com apparently spent all the money on the mas‐
     cot, not on infrastructure. Once orders started pouring in, they weren’t prepared. The
     website was slow, transactions were lost, deliveries delayed, and so on…pretty much
     the worst-case scenario. So bad, in fact, that the business closed shortly after its disas‐
     trous Christmas rush, selling the only remaining valuable asset (the mascot) to a
     competitor.
     What the company needed was elastic scale: the ability to spin up more instances of
     resources, as needed. Cloud providers offer this feature as a commodity, but in the
     early days of the internet, companies had to manage their own infrastructure, and
     many fell victim to a previously unheard of phenomenon: too much success can kill
     the business. Pets.com and other similar horror stories led engineers to develop the
     frameworks that architects enjoy now.


The following sections delve into some of the newer intersections between the role of
architect and other parts of an organization, highlighting new capabilities and
responsibilities for architects.

Engineering Practices
Traditionally, software architecture was separate from the development process used
to create software. Dozens of popular methodologies exist to build software, includ‐
ing Waterfall and many flavors of Agile (such as Scrum, Extreme Programming, Lean,
and Crystal), which mostly don’t impact software architecture.
However, over the last few years, engineering advances have thrust process concerns
upon software architecture. It is useful to separate software development process from
engineering practices. By process, we mean how teams are formed and managed, how
meetings are conducted, and workflow organization; it refers to the mechanics of
how people organize and interact. Software engineering practices, on the other hand,
refer to process-agnostic practices that have illustrated, repeatable benefit. For exam‐
ple, continuous integration is a proven engineering practice that doesn’t rely on a par‐
ticular process.


            The Path from Extreme Programming to Continuous Delivery
     The origins of Extreme Programming (XP) nicely illustrate the difference between
     process and engineering. In the early 1990s, a group of experienced software develop‐
     ers, led by Kent Beck, started questioning the dozens of different development pro‐
     cesses popular at the time. In their experience, it seemed that none of them created
     repeatably good outcomes. One of the XP founders said that choosing one of the
     extant processes was “no more guarantee of project success than flipping a coin.”
     They decided to rethink how to build software, and they started the XP project in
     March of 1996. To inform their process, they rejected the conventional wisdom and


14     |   Chapter 1: Introduction
 focused on the practices that led to project success in the past, pushed to the extreme.
 Their reasoning was that they’d seen a correlation on previous projects between more
 tests and higher quality. Thus, the XP approach to testing took the practice to the
 extreme: do test-first development, ensuring that all code is tested before it enters the
 code base.
 XP was lumped into other popular Agile processes that shared similar perspectives,
 but it was one of the few methodologies that included engineering practices such as
 automation, testing, continuous integration, and other concrete, experienced-based
 techniques. The efforts to continue advancing the engineering side of software
 development continued with the book Continuous Delivery (Addison-Wesley Profes‐
 sional)—an updated version of many XP practices—and came to fruition in the
 DevOps movement. In many ways, the DevOps revolution occurred when operations
 adopted engineering practices originally espoused by XP: automation, testing, declar‐
 ative single source of truth, and others.
 We strongly support these advances, which form the incremental steps that will even‐
 tually graduate software development into a proper engineering discipline.


Focusing on engineering practices is important. First, software development lacks
many of the features of more mature engineering disciplines. For example, civil engi‐
neers can predict structural change with much more accuracy than similarly impor‐
tant aspects of software structure. Second, one of the Achilles heels of software
development is estimation—how much time, how many resources, how much
money? Part of this difficulty lies with antiquated accounting practices that cannot
accommodate the exploratory nature of software development, but another part is
because we’re traditionally bad at estimation, at least in part because of unknown
unknowns.
    …because as we know, there are known knowns; there are things we know we know.
    We also know there are known unknowns; that is to say we know there are some things
    we do not know. But there are also unknown unknowns—the ones we don’t know we
    don’t know.
       —Former United States Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld

Unknown unknowns are the nemesis of software systems. Many projects start with a
list of known unknowns: things developers must learn about the domain and technol‐
ogy they know are upcoming. However, projects also fall victim to unknown
unknowns: things no one knew were going to crop up yet have appeared unexpect‐
edly. This is why all “Big Design Up Front” software efforts suffer: architects cannot
design for unknown unknowns. To quote Mark (one of your authors):
    All architectures become iterative because of unknown unknowns, Agile just recognizes
    this and does it sooner.




                                                           Intersection of Architecture and…   |   15
Thus, while process is mostly separate from architecture, an iterative process fits the
nature of software architecture better. Teams trying to build a modern system such as
microservices using an antiquated process like Waterfall will find a great deal of fric‐
tion from an antiquated process that ignores the reality of how software comes
together.
Often, the architect is also the technical leader on projects and therefore determines
the engineering practices the team uses. Just as architects must carefully consider the
problem domain before choosing an architecture, they must also ensure that the
architectural style and engineering practices form a symbiotic mesh. For example, a
microservices architecture assumes automated machine provisioning, automated
testing and deployment, and a raft of other assumptions. Trying to build one of these
architectures with an antiquated operations group, manual processes, and little test‐
ing creates tremendous friction and challenges to success. Just as different problem
domains lend themselves toward certain architectural styles, engineering practices
have the same kind of symbiotic relationship.
The evolution of thought leading from Extreme Programming to Continuous Deliv‐
ery continues. Recent advances in engineering practices allow new capabilities within
architecture. Neal’s most recent book, Building Evolutionary Architectures (O’Reilly),
highlights new ways to think about the intersection of engineering practices and
architecture, allowing better automation of architectural governance. While we won’t
summarize that book here, it gives an important new nomenclature and way of think‐
ing about architectural characteristics that will infuse much of the remainder of this
book. Neal’s book covers techniques for building architectures that change gracefully
over time. In Chapter 4, we describe architecture as the combination of requirements
and additional concerns, as illustrated in Figure 1-7.




Figure 1-7. The architecture for a software system consists of both requirements and all
the other architectural characteristics

As any experience in the software development world illustrates, nothing remains
static. Thus, architects may design a system to meet certain criteria, but that design
must survive both implementation (how can architects make sure that their design is
implemented correctly) and the inevitable change driven by the software develop‐
ment ecosystem. What we need is an evolutionary architecture.




16   |   Chapter 1: Introduction
Building Evolutionary Architectures introduces the concept of using fitness functions to
protect (and govern) architectural characteristics as change occurs over time. The
concept comes from evolutionary computing. When designing a genetic algorithm,
developers have a variety of techniques to mutate the solution, evolving new solutions
iteratively. When designing such an algorithm for a specific goal, developers must
measure the outcome to see if it is closer or further away from an optimal solution;
that measure is a fitness function. For example, if developers designed a genetic algo‐
rithm to solve the traveling salesperson problem (whose goal is the shortest route
between various cities), the fitness function would look at the path length.
Building Evolutionary Architectures co-opts this idea to create architectural fitness
functions: an objective integrity assessment of some architectural characteristic(s).
This assessment may include a variety of mechanisms, such as metrics, unit tests,
monitors, and chaos engineering. For example, an architect may identify page load
time as an importance characteristic of the architecture. To allow the system to
change without degrading performance, the architecture builds a fitness function as a
test that measures page load time for each page and then runs the test as part of the
continuous integration for the project. Thus, architects always know the status of crit‐
ical parts of the architecture because they have a verification mechanism in the form
of fitness functions for each part.
We won’t go into the full details of fitness functions here. However, we will point out
opportunities and examples of the approach where applicable. Note the correlation
between how often fitness functions execute and the feedback they provide. You’ll see
that adopting Agile engineering practices such as continuous integration, automated
machine provisioning, and similar practices makes building resilient architectures
easier. It also illustrates how intertwined architecture has become with engineering
practices.

Operations/DevOps
The most obvious recent intersection between architecture and related fields occur‐
red with the advent of DevOps, driven by some rethinking of architectural axioms.
For many years, many companies considered operations as a separate function from
software development; they often outsource operations to another company as a cost-
saving measure. Many architectures designed during the 1990s and 2000s assumed
that architects couldn’t control operations and were built defensively around that
restriction (for a good example of this, see Space-Based Architecture in Chapter 15).
However, a few years ago, several companies started experimenting with new forms of
architecture that combine many operational concerns with the architecture. For
example, in older-style architectures, such as ESB-driven SOA, the architecture was
designed to handle things like elastic scale, greatly complicating the architecture in
the process. Basically, architects were forced to defensively design around the limita‐


                                                        Intersection of Architecture and…   |   17
tions introduced because of the cost-saving measure of outsourcing operations. Thus,
they built architectures that could handle scale, performance, elasticity, and a host of
other capabilities internally. The side effect of that design was vastly more complex
architecture.
The builders of the microservices style of architecture realized that these operational
concerns are better handled by operations. By creating a liaison between architecture
and operations, the architects can simplify the design and rely on operations for the
things they handle best. Thus, realizing a misappropriation of resources led to acci‐
dental complexity, and architects and operations teamed up to create microservices,
the details of which we cover in Chapter 17.

Process
Another axiom is that software architecture is mostly orthogonal to the software
development process; the way that you build software (process) has little impact on
the software architecture (structure). Thus, while the software development process a
team uses has some impact on software architecture (especially around engineering
practices), historically they have been thought of as mostly separate. Most books on
software architecture ignore the software development process, making specious
assumptions about things like predictability. However, the process by which teams
develop software has an impact on many facets of software architecture. For example,
many companies over the last few decades have adopted Agile development method‐
ologies because of the nature of software. Architects in Agile projects can assume iter‐
ative development and therefore a faster feedback loop for decisions. That in turn
allows architects to be more aggressive about experimentation and other knowledge
that relies on feedback.
As the previous quote from Mark observes, all architecture becomes iterative; it’s only
a matter of time. Toward that end, we’re going assume a baseline of Agile methodolo‐
gies throughout and call out exceptions where appropriate. For example, it is still
common for many monolithic architectures to use older processes because of their
age, politics, or other mitigating factors unrelated to software.
One critical aspect of architecture where Agile methodologies shine is restructuring.
Teams often find that they need to migrate their architecture from one pattern to
another. For example, a team started with a monolithic architecture because it was
easy and fast to bootstrap, but now they need to move it to a more modern architec‐
ture. Agile methodologies support these kinds of changes better than planning-heavy
processes because of the tight feedback loop and encouragement of techniques like
the Strangler Pattern and feature toggles.




18   | Chapter 1: Introduction
Data
A large percentage of serious application development includes external data storage,
often in the form of a relational (or, increasingly, NoSQL) database. However, many
books about software architecture include only a light treatment of this important
aspect of architecture. Code and data have a symbiotic relationship: one isn’t useful
without the other.
Database administrators often work alongside architects to build data architecture for
complex systems, analyzing how relationships and reuse will affect a portfolio of
applications. We won’t delve into that level of specialized detail in this book. At the
same time, we won’t ignore the existence and dependence on external storage. In par‐
ticular, when we talk about the operational aspects of architecture and architectural
quantum (see “Architectural Quanta and Granularity” on page 92), we include impor‐
tant external concerns such as databases.

Laws of Software Architecture
While the scope of software architecture is almost impossibly broad, unifying ele‐
ments do exist. The authors have first and foremost learned the First Law of Software
Architecture by constantly stumbling across it:
    Everything in software architecture is a trade-off.
       —First Law of Software Architecture

Nothing exists on a nice, clean spectrum for software architects. Every decision must
take into account many opposing factors.
    If an architect thinks they have discovered something that isn’t a trade-off, more likely
    they just haven’t identified the trade-off yet.
       —Corollary 1

We define software architecture in terms beyond structural scaffolding, incorporating
principles, characteristics, and so on. Architecture is broader than just the combina‐
tion of structural elements, reflected in our Second Law of Software Architecture:
    Why is more important than how.
       —Second Law of Software Architecture

The authors discovered the importance of this perspective when we tried keeping the
results of exercises done by students during workshop as they crafted architecture
solutions. Because the exercises were timed, the only artifacts we kept were the dia‐
grams representing the topology. In other words, we captured how they solved the
problem but not why the team made particular choices. An architect can look at an
existing system they have no knowledge of and ascertain how the structure of the


                                                                  Laws of Software Architecture   |   19
architecture works, but will struggle explaining why certain choices were made versus
others.
Throughout the book, we highlight why architects make certain decisions along with
trade-offs. We also highlight good techniques for capturing important decisions in
“Architecture Decision Records” on page 285.




20   |   Chapter 1: Introduction
                                                                       PART I
                                                      Foundations




To understand important trade-offs in architecture, developers must understand
some basic concepts and terminology concerning components, modularity, coupling,
and connascence.
                                                                          CHAPTER 2
                                           Architectural Thinking




An architect sees things differently from a developer’s point of view, much in the
same way a meteorologist might see clouds differently from an artist’s point of view.
This is called architectural thinking. Unfortunately, too many architects believe that
architectural thinking is simply just “thinking about the architecture.”
Architectural thinking is much more than that. It is seeing things with an architec‐
tural eye, or an architectural point of view. There are four main aspects of thinking
like an architect. First, it’s understanding the difference between architecture and
design and knowing how to collaborate with development teams to make architecture
work. Second, it’s about having a wide breadth of technical knowledge while still
maintaining a certain level of technical depth, allowing the architect to see solutions
and possibilities that others do not see. Third, it’s about understanding, analyzing,
and reconciling trade-offs between various solutions and technologies. Finally, it’s
about understanding the importance of business drivers and how they translate to
architectural concerns.
In this chapter we explore these four aspects of thinking like an architect and seeing
things with an architectural eye.

Architecture Versus Design
The difference between architecture and design is often a confusing one. Where does
architecture end and design begin? What responsibilities does an architect have ver‐
sus those of a developer? Thinking like an architect is knowing the difference
between architecture and design and seeing how the two integrate closely to form sol‐
utions to business and technical problems.
Consider Figure 2-1, which illustrates the traditional responsibilities an architect has,
as compared to those of a developer. As shown in the diagram, an architect is respon‐


                                                                                       23
sible for things like analyzing business requirements to extract and define the archi‐
tectural characteristics (“-ilities”), selecting which architecture patterns and styles
would fit the problem domain, and creating components (the building blocks of the
system). The artifacts created from these activities are then handed off to the develop‐
ment team, which is responsible for creating class diagrams for each component, cre‐
ating user interface screens, and developing and testing source code.




Figure 2-1. Traditional view of architecture versus design

There are several issues with the traditional responsibility model illustrated in
Figure 2-1. As a matter of fact, this illustration shows exactly why architecture rarely
works. Specifically, it is the unidirectional arrow passing though the virtual and phys‐
ical barriers separating the architect from the developer that causes all of the prob‐
lems associated with architecture. Decisions an architect makes sometimes never
make it to the development teams, and decisions development teams make that
change the architecture rarely get back to the architect. In this model the architect is
disconnected from the development teams, and as such the architecture rarely pro‐
vides what it was originally set out to do.
To make architecture work, both the physical and virtual barriers that exist between
architects and developers must be broken down, thus forming a strong bidirectional
relationship between architects and development teams. The architect and developer
must be on the same virtual team to make this work, as depicted in Figure 2-2. Not
only does this model facilitate strong bidirectional communication between architec‐
ture and development, but it also allows the architect to provide mentoring and
coaching to developers on the team.




24   |   Chapter 2: Architectural Thinking
Figure 2-2. Making architecture work through collaboration

Unlike the old-school waterfall approaches to static and rigid software architecture,
the architecture of today’s systems changes and evolves every iteration or phase of a
project. A tight collaboration between the architect and the development team is
essential for the success of any software project. So where does architecture end and
design begin? It doesn’t. They are both part of the circle of life within a software
project and must always be kept in synchronization with each other in order to
succeed.

Technical Breadth
The scope of technological detail differs between developers and architects. Unlike a
developer, who must have a significant amount of technical depth to perform their
job, a software architect must have a significant amount of technical breadth to think
like an architect and see things with an architecture point of view. This is illustrated
by the knowledge pyramid shown in Figure 2-3, which encapsulates all the technical
knowledge in the world. It turns out that the kind of information a technologist
should value differs with career stages.




                                                                    Technical Breadth   |   25
Figure 2-3. The pyramid representing all knowledge

As shown in Figure 2-3, any individual can partition all their knowledge into three
sections: stuff you know, stuff you know you don’t know, and stuff you don’t know you
don’t know.
Stuff you know includes the technologies, frameworks, languages, and tools a technol‐
ogist uses on a daily basis to perform their job, such as knowing Java as a Java pro‐
grammer. Stuff you know you don’t know includes those things a technologist knows a
little about or has heard of but has little or no expertise in. A good example of this
level of knowledge is the Clojure programming language. Most technologists have
heard of Clojure and know it’s a programming language based on Lisp, but they can’t
code in the language. Stuff you don’t know you don’t know is the largest part of the
knowledge triangle and includes the entire host of technologies, tools, frameworks,
and languages that would be the perfect solution to a problem a technologist is trying
to solve, but the technologist doesn’t even know those things exist.




26   |   Chapter 2: Architectural Thinking
A developer’s early career focuses on expanding the top of the pyramid, to build
experience and expertise. This is the ideal focus early on, because developers need
more perspective, working knowledge, and hands-on experience. Expanding the top
incidentally expands the middle section; as developers encounter more technologies
and related artifacts, it adds to their stock of stuff you know you don’t know.
In Figure 2-4, expanding the top of the pyramid is beneficial because expertise is val‐
ued. However, the stuff you know is also the stuff you must maintain—nothing is static
in the software world. If a developer becomes an expert in Ruby on Rails, that exper‐
tise won’t last if they ignore Ruby on Rails for a year or two. The things at the top of
the pyramid require time investment to maintain expertise. Ultimately, the size of the
top of an individual’s pyramid is their technical depth.




Figure 2-4. Developers must maintain expertise to retain it




                                                                    Technical Breadth   |   27
However, the nature of knowledge changes as developers transition into the architect
role. A large part of the value of an architect is a broad understanding of technology
and how to use it to solve particular problems. For example, as an architect, it is more
beneficial to know that five solutions exist for a particular problem than to have sin‐
gular expertise in only one. The most important parts of the pyramid for architects
are the top and middle sections; how far the middle section penetrates into the bot‐
tom section represents an architect’s technical breadth, as shown in Figure 2-5.




Figure 2-5. What someone knows is technical depth, and how much someone knows is
technical breadth

As an architect, breadth is more important than depth. Because architects must make
decisions that match capabilities to technical constraints, a broad understanding of a
wide variety of solutions is valuable. Thus, for an architect, the wise course of action
is to sacrifice some hard-won expertise and use that time to broaden their portfolio,
as shown in Figure 2-6. As illustrated in the diagram, some areas of expertise will
remain, probably in particularly enjoyable technology areas, while others usefully
atrophy.




28   |   Chapter 2: Architectural Thinking
Figure 2-6. Enhanced breadth and shrinking depth for the architect role

Our knowledge pyramid illustrates how fundamentally different the role of architect
compares to developer. Developers spend their whole careers honing expertise, and
transitioning to the architect role means a shift in that perspective, which many indi‐
viduals find difficult. This in turn leads to two common dysfunctions: first, an archi‐
tect tries to maintain expertise in a wide variety of areas, succeeding in none of them
and working themselves ragged in the process. Second, it manifests as stale expertise
—the mistaken sensation that your outdated information is still cutting edge. We see
this often in large companies where the developers who founded the company have
moved into leadership roles yet still make technology decisions using ancient criteria
(see “Frozen Caveman Anti-Pattern” on page 30).
Architects should focus on technical breadth so that they have a larger quiver from
which to draw arrows. Developers transitioning to the architect role may have to
change the way they view knowledge acquisition. Balancing their portfolio of knowl‐
edge regarding depth versus breadth is something every developer should consider
throughout their career.




                                                                    Technical Breadth   |   29
                                      Frozen Caveman Anti-Pattern
     A behavioral anti-pattern commonly observed in the wild, the Frozen Caveman Anti-
     Pattern, describes an architect who always reverts back to their pet irrational concern
     for every architecture. For example, one of Neal’s colleagues worked on a system that
     featured a centralized architecture. Yet, each time they delivered the design to the cli‐
     ent architects, the persistent question was “But what if we lose Italy?” Several years
     before, a freak communication problem had prevented headquarters from communi‐
     cating with its stores in Italy, causing great inconvenience. While the chances of a
     reoccurrence were extremely small, the architects had become obsessed about this
     particular architectural characteristic.
     Generally, this anti-pattern manifests in architects who have been burned in the past
     by a poor decision or unexpected occurrence, making them particularly cautious in
     the future. While risk assessment is important, it should be realistic as well. Under‐
     standing the difference between genuine versus perceived technical risk is part of the
     ongoing learning process for architects. Thinking like an architect requires overcom‐
     ing these “frozen caveman” ideas and experiences, seeing other solutions, and asking
     more relevant questions.



Analyzing Trade-Offs
Thinking like an architect is all about seeing trade-offs in every solution, technical or
otherwise, and analyzing those trade-offs to determine what is the best solution. To
quote Mark (one of your authors):
       Architecture is the stuff you can’t Google.
Everything in architecture is a trade-off, which is why the famous answer to every
architecture question in the universe is “it depends.” While many people get increas‐
ingly annoyed at this answer, it is unfortunately true. You cannot Google the answer
to whether REST or messaging would be better, or whether microservices is the right
architecture style, because it does depend. It depends on the deployment environ‐
ment, business drivers, company culture, budgets, timeframes, developer skill set, and
dozens of other factors. Everyone’s environment, situation, and problem is different,
hence why architecture is so hard. To quote Neal (another one of your authors):
       There are no right or wrong answers in architecture—only trade-offs.




30     |   Chapter 2: Architectural Thinking
For example, consider an item auction system, as illustrated in Figure 2-7, where
someone places a bid for an item up for auction.




Figure 2-7. Auction system example of a trade-off—queues or topics?

The Bid Producer service generates a bid from the bidder and then sends that bid
amount to the Bid Capture, Bid Tracking, and Bid Analytics services. This could
be done by using queues in a point-to-point messaging fashion or by using a topic in
a publish-and-subscribe messaging fashion. Which one should the architect use? You
can’t Google the answer. Architectural thinking requires the architect to analyze the
trade-offs associated with each option and select the best one given the specific
situation.
The two messaging options for the item auction system are shown in Figures 2-8 and
2-9, with Figure 2-8 illustrating the use of a topic in a publish-and-subscribe messag‐
ing model, and Figure 2-9 illustrating the use of queues in a point-to-point messaging
model.




Figure 2-8. Use of a topic for communication between services




                                                                 Analyzing Trade-Offs   |   31
Figure 2-9. Use of queues for communication between services

The clear advantage (and seemingly obvious solution) to this problem in Figure 2-8 is
that of architectural extensibility. The Bid Producer service only requires a single
connection to a topic, unlike the queue solution in Figure 2-9 where the Bid Pro
ducer needs to connect to three different queues. If a new service called Bid History
were to be added to this system due to the requirement to provide each bidder with a
history of all the bids they made in each auction, no changes at all would be needed to
the existing system. When the new Bid History service is created, it could simply
subscribe to the topic already containing the bid information. In the queue option
shown in Figure 2-9, however, a new queue would be required for the Bid History
service, and the Bid Producer would need to be modified to add an additional con‐
nection to the new queue. The point here is that using queues requires significant
change to the system when adding new bidding functionality, whereas with the topic
approach no changes are needed at all in the existing infrastructure. Also, notice that
the Bid Producer is more decoupled in the topic option—the Bid Producer doesn’t
know how the bidding information will be used or by which services. In the queue
option the Bid Producer knows exactly how the bidding information is used (and by
whom), and hence is more coupled to the system.
With this analysis it seems clear that the topic approach using the publish-and-
subscribe messaging model is the obvious and best choice. However, to quote Rich
Hickey, the creator of the Clojure programming language:
     Programmers know the benefits of everything and the trade-offs of nothing. Architects
     need to understand both.



32   |   Chapter 2: Architectural Thinking
Thinking architecturally is looking at the benefits of a given solution, but also analyz‐
ing the negatives, or trade-offs, associated with a solution. Continuing with the auc‐
tion system example, a software architect would analyze the negatives of the topic
solution. In analyzing the differences, notice first in Figure 2-8 that with a topic, any‐
one can access bidding data, which introduces a possible issue with data access and
data security. In the queue model illustrated in Figure 2-9, the data sent to the queue
can only be accessed by the specific consumer receiving that message. If a rogue ser‐
vice did listen in on a queue, those bids would not be received by the corresponding
service, and a notification would immediately be sent about the loss of data (and
hence a possible security breach). In other words, it is very easy to wiretap into a
topic, but not a queue.
In addition to the security issue, the topic solution in Figure 2-8 only supports homo‐
geneous contracts. All services receiving the bidding data must accept the same con‐
tract and set of bidding data. In the queue option in Figure 2-9, each consumer can
have its own contract specific to the data it needs. For example, suppose the new Bid
History service requires the current asking price along with the bid, but no other ser‐
vice needs that information. In this case, the contract would need to be modified,
impacting all other services using that data. In the queue model, this would be a sepa‐
rate channel, hence a separate contract not impacting any other service.
Another disadvantage of the topic model illustrated in Figure 2-8 is that it does not
support monitoring of the number of messages in the topic and hence auto-scaling
capabilities. However, with the queue option in Figure 2-9, each queue can be moni‐
tored individually, and programmatic load balancing applied to each bidding con‐
sumer so that each can be automatically scaled independency from one another. Note
that this trade-off is technology specific in that the Advanced Message Queuing Pro‐
tocol (AMQP) can support programmatic load balancing and monitoring because of
the separation between an exchange (what the producer sends to) and a queue (what
the consumer listens to).
Given this trade-off analysis, now which is the better option? And the answer? It
depends! Table 2-1 summarizes these trade-offs.

Table 2-1. Trade-offs for topics
Topic advantages                   Topic disadvantages
Architectural extensibility        Data access and data security concerns
Service decoupling                 No heterogeneous contracts
                                   Monitoring and programmatic
                                   scalability




                                                                            Analyzing Trade-Offs   |   33
The point here is that everything in software architecture has a trade-off: an advantage
and disadvantage. Thinking like an architect is analyzing these trade-offs, then asking
“which is more important: extensibility or security?” The decision between different
solutions will always depend on the business drivers, environment, and a host of
other factors.

Understanding Business Drivers
Thinking like an architect is understanding the business drivers that are required for
the success of the system and translating those requirements into architecture charac‐
teristics (such as scalability, performance, and availability). This is a challenging task
that requires the architect to have some level of business domain knowledge and
healthy, collaborative relationships with key business stakeholders. We’ve devoted
several chapters in the book on this specific topic. In Chapter 4 we define various
architecture characteristics. In Chapter 5 we describe ways to identify and qualify
architecture characteristics. And in Chapter 6 we describe how to measure each of
these characteristics to ensure the business needs of the system are met.

Balancing Architecture and Hands-On Coding
One of the difficult tasks an architect faces is how to balance hands-on coding with
software architecture. We firmly believe that every architect should code and be able
to maintain a certain level of technical depth (see “Technical Breadth” on page 25).
While this may seem like an easy task, it is sometimes rather difficult to accomplish.
The first tip in striving for a balance between hands-on coding and being a software
architect is avoiding the bottleneck trap. The bottleneck trap occurs when the archi‐
tect has taken ownership of code within the critical path of a project (usually the
underlying framework code) and becomes a bottleneck to the team. This happens
because the architect is not a full-time developer and therefore must balance between
playing the developer role (writing and testing source code) and the architect role
(drawing diagrams, attending meetings, and well, attending more meetings).
One way to avoid the bottleneck trap as an effective software architect is to delegate
the critical path and framework code to others on the development team and then
focus on coding a piece of business functionality (a service or a screen) one to three
iterations down the road. Three positive things happen by doing this. First, the archi‐
tect is gaining hands-on experience writing production code while no longer becom‐
ing a bottleneck on the team. Second, the critical path and framework code is
distributed to the development team (where it belongs), giving them ownership and a
better understanding of the harder parts of the system. Third, and perhaps most
important, the architect is writing the same business-related source code as the devel‐
opment team and is therefore better able to identify with the development team in


34   | Chapter 2: Architectural Thinking
terms of the pain they might be going through with processes, procedures, and the
development environment.
Suppose, however, that the architect is not able to develop code with the development
team. How can a software architect still remain hands-on and maintain some level of
technical depth? There are four basic ways an architect can still remain hands-on at
work without having to “practice coding from home” (although we recommend prac‐
ticing coding at home as well).
The first way is to do frequent proof-of-concepts or POCs. This practice not only
requires the architect to write source code, but it also helps validate an architecture
decision by taking the implementation details into account. For example, if an archi‐
tect is stuck trying to make a decision between two caching solutions, one effective
way to help make this decision is to develop a working example in each caching prod‐
uct and compare the results. This allows the architect to see first-hand the implemen‐
tation details and the amount of effort required to develop the full solution. It also
allows the architect to better compare architectural characteristics such as scalability,
performance, or overall fault tolerance of the different caching solutions.
Our advice when doing proof-of-concept work is that, whenever possible, the archi‐
tect should write the best production-quality code they can. We recommend this
practice for two reasons. First, quite often, throwaway proof-of-concept code goes
into the source code repository and becomes the reference architecture or guiding
example for others to follow. The last thing an architect would want is for their
throwaway, sloppy code to be a representation of their typical work. The second rea‐
son is that by writing production-quality proof-of-concept code, the architect gets
practice writing quality, well-structured code rather than continually developing bad
coding practices.
Another way an architect can remain hands-on is to tackle some of the technical debt
stories or architecture stories, freeing the development team up to work on the criti‐
cal functional user stories. These stories are usually low priority, so if the architect
does not have the chance to complete a technical debt or architecture story within a
given iteration, it’s not the end of the world and generally does not impact the success
of the iteration.
Similarly, working on bug fixes within an iteration is another way of maintaining
hands-on coding while helping the development team as well. While certainly not
glamorous, this technique allows the architect to identify where issues and weakness
may be within the code base and possibly the architecture.
Leveraging automation by creating simple command-line tools and analyzers to help
the development team with their day-to-day tasks is another great way to maintain
hands-on coding skills while making the development team more effective. Look for
repetitive tasks the development team performs and automate the process. The devel‐


                                                 Balancing Architecture and Hands-On Coding   |   35
opment team will be grateful for the automation. Some examples are automated
source validators to help check for specific coding standards not found in other lint
tests, automated checklists, and repetitive manual code refactoring tasks.
Automation can also be in the form of architectural analysis and fitness functions to
ensure the vitality and compliance of the architecture. For example, an architect can
write Java code in ArchUnit in the Java platform to automate architectural compli‐
ance, or write custom fitness functions to ensure architectural compliance while gain‐
ing hands-on experience. We talk about these techniques in Chapter 6.
A final technique to remain hands-on as an architect is to do frequent code reviews.
While the architect is not actually writing code, at least they are involved in the source
code. Further, doing code reviews has the added benefits of being able to ensure com‐
pliance with the architecture and to seek out mentoring and coaching opportunities
on the team.




36   | Chapter 2: Architectural Thinking
